Hey, what's up.
There's a difference between "digital veganism"
and real-world veganism, just as there's a
difference between "digital activism" and
real-world political activism.
And that's okay.
That's not something to feel guilty about,
that's not something to beat yourself up about.
One of the questions I had coming in to me,
from some of the guys who are in Thailand
right now, these western entrepreneurs (in
Thailand) who are part of the online phenomenon
of the Thai Fruit Festival, part of this high-profile
new vegan movement; the question they sent
to me was, "Look, what can we do now?"
Given the critique I'd already presented,
given the concerns I've already raised, given
the danger that "digital veganism" is slipping
further and further away from the core concerns
that define veganism; given that real veganism
is not about looking good in a bikini, that
it's not about buying an expensive bicycle
and riding it over 100 km a day in Thailand;
given that the core concerns and issues of
veganism have nothing to do with being on
[this] kind of permanent vacation, or presenting
to the world on instagram a phony life of
luxury, athleticism, relaxation, beauty, you
name it.
Those issues are marginal to veganism at best,
what can we do now?
And I gave a really sincere answer.
To be honest, I hesitated.
I kind of asked myself, "Am I really gonna
give a sincere answer or not?"
I gave an answer that was both specifically
geared to digital veganism as something that
exists in its own right on Youtube, connected
to the real world, but only tenuously, and
I also gave an answer that specifically reflected
the geographical reality: we're talking about
a certain community of entrepreneurs, some
of whom are in Thailand, some of whom are
in California, people who have the potential
to make a difference, and people who already
are making a difference (who already are successful
in their way), but who are definitely not
connected to social and political reality
in any one place.
As I've already mentioned at length, the vegans
who are in Northern Thailand have shockingly
little connection to the real-world issues
in Northern Thailand, and whether or not that's
a problem, it's also (definitely) an opportunity.
So that was the question that was put to me:
what can we do now?
Given the bits and pieces that we have to
work with, positively, constructively, what
can we do?
Given the critique, given the issues, but
also given the opportunities.
Now, for "digital veganism", and for the entrepreneurs
(who are spread out all over the world), this
is my answer; at first it may seem a little
bit strange, but it reflects positive examples
that you can draw from both real-world politics
and real-world religious organizations (you
can also contrast it to negative examples
from the same two fields, politics and religion).
The honest answer I gave was, look, vegans
in this situation, vegans on Youtube, digital
vegans, they can build a news-service, they
can build a talk-show, similar to T.Y.T.,
similar to The Young Turks.
The Young Turks is one of the most famous
and successful news-discussion programs on
the internet.
It has been around for more than ten years.
You can google it really quickly.
Now a lot of people might be shocked that
I said that, "Wait a minute, you're not contrasting
something real to something fake, you're just
talking about a different type of emphasis".
Well, um, when you have an engagement with
real-world issues (any kind of sincere reporting,
sincere debating, etc.), and I'm not picking
an impossibly high standard here to compare
what's going on in veganism to (The Young
Turks is a very casual format for debate and
discussion of current political issues), but
when you put up that kind of content, when
you show concern and engagement with real-world
political issues (and, of course, vegans would
not be engaged with quite the same issues
as The Young Turks, they'd have more interest
in ecology, more interest in some selection
of issues, you define your mandate however
you want to define it), when you come back
week after week and just show a sober, sincere
engagement with those issues, when you make
mistakes and you come back in the next episode
a week later and apologize, and have a correction
(showing, "look, we messed up last week, here
are the facts on that issue"), whatever it
is, even at that lowest level of just discussion
of the facts as they come out, what you build
is a constituency in the old-fashioned political
sense.
The people who watch your program (and all
kinds of people who are not vegan will be
drawn in just because you're doing, again,
good reporting, or good discussion of what
other people have reported, good disclosure
of the facts, whatever it is you're doing)
if you have a fact-based program with the
vegan perspective implicitly built into that,
or once-in-a-while the veganism comes to the
fore, if you just have a group of vegans doing
what The Young Turks are already doing you
will build a constituency.
People who really are supporting your political
direction will (over time) select themselves,
step up, and want to support you in that program.
And The Young Turks [show] is a positive example
in that their big political accomplishment,
their big political achievement, is that they
spun off an anti-corruption program that's
called Wolf-PAC (Wolf P.A.C.).
And that's an anti-corruption political movement
to try to reform legislation that defines
how donations are accepted by politicians
in the United States.
And that's a very specific issue, with a very
narrow constituency in the U.S.
There's no way you could pitch a T.V. show
saying, "We're going to build a news program
that just appeals to people who are outraged
about political corruption".
There's no audience for that.
There's no way you can say, "We're going to
be the internet news-show that talks about
the things that matter to people who want
financial reform in the American political
system."
That's a tiny audience, but what they did
is, they build a generally respectable, factual
show, engaged with all kinds of political
issues, and then within that broad audience
they built a hardcore political constituency
who will really support these efforts to reform
the American electoral system.
And compared to anything else that's happened
in the last 25 years in American politics
they've been remarkably successful.
No joke.
If you want to look into it, you can.
Okay, you may well say, T.Y.T. is a holotype,
it's a unique example and its uniqueness means
that it can't be reproduced.
Well, I disagree because of my experience
in Asia, my experience with Asian politics,
and because of my experience with Buddhism,
Confucianism, and other Asian religions.
Something for you to google is the New Tang
Dynasty network; they abbreviate that as N.T.D.,
"New Tang Dynasty".
That started off as a politically-persecuted
group of Buddhists… people involved with
traditional Chinese religion, probably not
best to say Buddhism in the narrow definition
of the idea of Buddhism.
They started their own news network, and they're
a religious movement that (in many ways) nobody
took seriously, and that nobody regarded as
politically credible.
They built up political credibility for [themselves].
Basically their bias is that they support
democracy, and that they're, um, critical
of the current government of China (of mainland
China).
They're not left wing, like a lot of Chinese
traditionalists they're into respecting your
grandparents and some other conservative values,
but conservative from a Chinese perspective.
Very hard for a westerner to relate to that
in terms of left and right.
Now, New Tang Dynasty, if you look up their
stuff, you can find them through Youtube,
you can find short clips, but they are a broadcast
news-network, they do documentaries, they
do interviews with academics, they do all
kinds of things, and they broadcast over Satellite
TV around the world.
In many ways they're much more successful
and professional-looking than The Young Turks,
much more serious in tone, and they are not
a unique example.
On the tiny island of Taiwan (Taiwan is a
small, crowded nation) there's actually a
long list of of TV news-programs, uh, news-networks,
channels, that are operated by different religious
groups and different dissident groups.
Sometimes people who have run away from China,
sometimes groups that were always in Taiwan,
and so on.
And, again, the interesting thing is, just
by talking in a transparent, down-to-earth
way about real-world events, all those groups
prove, again and again, you build up a constituency:
you make the connections with like-minded
people and those like-minded people may donate
money to your cause, it may be that like The
Young Turks you spin off a separate political
organization, or whatever it is.
Yeah, so that was my honest answer to the
question of what can happen now to make the
situation with "digital veganism" better.
Yes, you could have some kind of meaningful,
current-events talk-show (The Young Turks
calls itself a talk-show, we're not even talking
about original, primary-source journalism)
if you got five people or 10 people together
who could really co-operate, who all happen
to be vegan, and who wanted to put something
on Youtube that's really substantive, that
is not about buying expensive bicycles, that
is not about how good you look in a bikini,
that is engaged with real-world issues anywhere
in the world.
Now, where it is in the world would change
your mandate and how you define it from day
1.
If I were doing a project like that in Canada,
based in Ottawa, the capital city of Canada,
I would be looking at a service that would
talk a lot about First Nations issues, about
indigenous peoples' politics.
Obviously, if you're in any specific country,
you're going to want to look at agriculture
in that country, deforestation, politics of
animal rights to some extent; you would define
the mandate, the issues that are in, and the
issues that are out.
If it was a news-service that was based in
Chiang Mai, if you were putting together a
bunch of vegans to do original research and
original opinions [in reaction to] what's
going on, how you define that would be up
in the air.
You'd have to make some hard decisions and
you'd have to have people who come on really
discuss, "Look, what's on the table?
What are we going to report on, and what are
we not going to report on?"
And what I'm suggesting here is not a vegan
news show.
Actually there's a Youtuber called Kerry McCarpet
and she, as one woman, alone, is currently
doing a vegan news show, where she just talks
about vegan issues that have popped up in
the mainstream media (so, recent controversies
with Beyonce deciding she's vegan, and these
kinds of things, things that happened in popular
newspapers).
That's not really what I'm talking about here,
although that's very praiseworthy in its way.
Yeah, let me say this: some of the people
who have written to me (from Northern Thailand,
in response to my recent critique of what's
been going on there), some of them have said,
in effect, "Look, what we're doing may be
shallow, and it may be vain, it may be all
about good-looking people in bikinis and expensive
bicycles, but we want to think of this as
an advertisement for veganism, that we're
showing beauty, luxury, a life of self-indulgence,
and that that advertises veganism."
And my response to that is, "No, what you're
showing is a meaningless life, and you're
advertising veganism as the means to that
life."
And that plays into some shallow cult bullshit,
man.
And a lot of people in this game, they can't
see the harm in it: they can't see the harm
in getting on Youtube and promising you a
weight-loss miracle, in promising you that
you'll be more attractive, in promising you
that you'll make more money, that you'll be
happier, by being vegan.
You'll have unearned riches, that you're going
to work a four-hour work-week, and you're
going to unlock your potential through the
power of positive thinking: that's not a slippery
slope to some cult bullshit, that already
is some cult bullshit.
And that does not build a constituency.
Selling diet books may be a wonderful business,
but it does not build a constituency in this
way.
What I'm talking about is the opposite, where
you're not celebrating the most meaningless,
vain indulgences of the vegan lifestyle (right?),
and you're not promoting to people, "Hey,
if you become vegan, you too can live on permanent
vacation in Chiang Mai, you too can live a
life of constant self-indulgence and 'infinite
abundance'", and all this other stuff that
(on some level) everyone knows you can't deliver
on.
You know, look, hey, this promised lifestyle
in Northern Thailand, you guys who are making
Youtube videos promoting this: if you really
believe in it, why are you preaching it to
me?
Why are you preaching it to white people in
the Western world?
Why are you telling me to buy an airplane
ticket to go to Northern Thailand?
I've already been there and done that, I've
already been on a bicycle and gone more than
100 km at one time, I already know what that's
like.
But I wasn't doing it for meaningless reasons.
If you believed in that lifestyle, and if
you believed that people could have "abundance"
and a higher income, and the power of positive
thinking, why don't you preach that to the
people who work at the fruit market?
To the peasants who are growing your food?
Why don't you preach that, why don't you bring
that message, as a charity, to people who
have crossed the border from Cambodia into
Thailand, from Myanmar into Thailand, who
are living in poverty there?
Why don't you set up an N.G.O. locally to
bring that message to the people who need
it, and to the people whom it would help,
if it worked?
Instead of trying to sell it to people who
already have money, who already have leisure?
White, wealthy, western people, who can buy
an airplane ticket, and pretend to dissimulate
the lifestyle you're selling as the payoff
for turning vegan; with a whole bunch of distractions,
with a whole bunch of vain indulgences that
have nothing to do with the core issues of
compassion, ecology, ethics, you-name-it.
Trying to stay positive.
Real-world veganism is different from digital
veganism, and I accept that.
And I'm not here to hate on people because
the illusion they present on Instagram is
not the same as their real life.
Digital veganism is not the same as real-world
veganism.
There are people here, in the city I live
in, in Canada, and their idea of vegan activism
is, y'know, literally, smashing cages, and
literally carrying out sabotage.
And when I meet those people ('cause that's
real-world, that's not digital veganism),
when I meet those people, what I say to them
is, "Look, I've never met a vegan where I
thought, 'the best thing you can do with your
future, to make a difference, is spending
a couple of years in jail', and that's what
you're doing [to yourself]."
I'm against that kind of activism partly because
I don't think it's a good use of your time
to go to jail, no matter what symbolic value
you may imagine committing crimes and going
to jail [may have], that's bad advice.
I don't advise any kind of violent or illegal
action or protest in real life.
I also don't think that you should take the
back door into City Call when you haven't
tried the front door yet.
All these political issues, all these ethical
issues, all these concerns that are central
to veganism, you've got to try doing the legal,
ethical, public form of engagement, and only
after you've exhausted that should you even
look at bending the rules.
And in a country like Canada?
Have you ever taken a complaint to City Hall?
I have (a million years ago when I was living
in Toronto).
There are ways that we can engage in these
issues publicly and responsibly in terms of
real life vegan activism.
Now, digital activism, has drifted so far
from that range of options and issues I've
just described: City Hall through to people
going out and trying to sabotage a mink farm
(that's the way Gary Yourofsky got famous
in the first place, you know, he went to jail
because he sabotaged a mink farm; it's a crime).
That range of issues over here, the range
we're looking at on Youtube and Instagram
and in digital veganism is so disconnected,
it's so far away.
You know, why wouldn't one reflect the other?
Even if critically?
Even if your program on Youtube is asking
the question, "Look, should people really
be putting themselves in jail to sabotage
a mink farm?"
Y'know, how can we allow veganism to drift
so far away from its core issues and become
a celebration of, "Look at my new manicure",
"Don't I look hot in this new swimsuit?",
"Here are me and my wealthy friends wasting
our money (or wasting our parents' money)
to ride around on a Bianchi bicycle, that's
manufactured in Italy, while I'm in Southeast
Asia", editing out the poverty and the filth
and the struggle that's just out of the frame.
Look, on a really fundamental level, I can
sympathize with all these people, okay.
I think that veganism is such a fundamentally
important issue that there is almost no wrong
way to talk about it, that any discussion,
that any debate of this kind is making a positive
contribution, that any noise about veganism
is better than the silence that we're all
struggling against.
But when people have come to me with this
question, "How can we do better in 'digital
veganism'?
On Youtube, on the Net?"
"How can 'we' (this doesn't include me), how
can 'we' as a group of entrepreneurs and Youtube
personalities in Northern Thailand, in California,
scattered around the world, how can we do
something better?", I would say, hey, look
at The Young Turks.
Look at New Tang Dynasty.
Look at examples of movements, political movements
and religious movements, that built up their
own legitimacy and that built up a constituency,
not by glorifying themselves, not by making
promises they can't deliver on, not by this
kind of snake-oil-salesman "positive thinking",
"visualization", "lose-weight", "make-money",
not by any of that cult bullshit, but by having
a really sincere engagement with real-world
issues, through active research, informed
opinion, debate, coming back and admitting
when you're wrong about something.
Youtube would be a wonderful platform for
that.
And there should be a vegan voice, there should
be a plurality of vegan voices, both on a
global level and engaged with the reality
of particular places, like Chiang Mai, Thailand,
like Ottawa, Canada.
I've gotta say, we've got a lot of talented
people on Youtube, right now, talking about
veganism.
We can talk about something a lot more meaningful
than bikinis and bicycles.
We can make it happen.